\documentclass[11pt,twoside,letterpaper]{book}

\def\theshorttitle {UVa HSPC Guide}
\def\thelongtitle {University of Virginia High School Programming Contest Guide}
\title {\thetitle}
\author{Association for Computing Machinery Student Chapter at the University of Virginia}

% Packages
\usepackage{wrapfig}
\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{fullpage}
\usepackage[letterpaper,centering]{geometry}
\usepackage{fancyhdr}
\usepackage{lastpage}
\usepackage{enumitem}
\usepackage{ifthen}
\usepackage{palatino}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{float}

% Page offsets
\setlength{\topmargin}{-.5in}
\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-0.25in}
\setlength{\evensidemargin}{-0.25in}
\setlength{\textwidth}{7truein}
\setlength{\textheight}{9truein}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt}
\setlength{\hoffset}{0in}
\setlength{\voffset}{-0.2in}
\setlength{\headheight}{0.33in}
\setlength{\headsep}{0.5in}
\setlength{\marginparwidth}{0in}

% Page Numbering as 1, 2, 3, etc
\pagenumbering{arabic}
\pagestyle{fancy}

\newcommand{\footurl}[1]{\footnote{\scriptsize\url{#1}}}

% adapted from https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/121865/nameref-how-to-display-section-name-and-its-number?rq=1
\newcommand*{\fullref}[1]{\hyperref[{#1}]{\autoref*{#1}: \nameref*{#1}}}

\cfoot{\theshorttitle}
\rfoot{\thepage\ of \pageref{LastPage}}

\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

\newenvironment{itemlist}{
\begin{itemize}
\setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
{\end{itemize}}

\begin{document}

\title {\huge High School Programming Contest Guide \\
\vspace{1in}
\resizebox{3in}{!}{\includegraphics{images/icpc-hspc-logo.png}}
\vspace{1in}
}
\author {\Large Compiled by ACM @ UVa}
\maketitle

\cleardoublepage

\tableofcontents

%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{Introduction}

Put intro here\ldots

This guide is the result of efforts by a number of individuals at the
University of Virginia.  We have hosted high school programming
contests since 2011, and started collecting our notes shortly
afterward.  This document evolved over the next few years, and was
written in this for for the ``Organizing a High School Programming
Contest'' workshop at SIGCSE
2018\footurl{https://sigcse2018.sigcse.org/attendees/workshops.html}.
The latest version is available online at
\url{http://aaronbloomfield.github.io/hspc}, which is sourced from a
Github repository at \url{https://github.com/aaronbloomfield/hspc}.


\section{Licensing}

This document, and the rest of the materials contained therein~--
except for the logo~-- are released under a Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License\footurl{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/} (CC
BY-SA).

The following HSPC logo is used throughout this document:

\begin{center}
  \resizebox{2in}{!}{\includegraphics{images/icpc-hspc-logo.png}}
\end{center}

This logo was derived, with permission, from the main ICPC logo, which
can be found online at the ICPC
website\footurl{https://icpc.baylor.edu/}.  The logo is owned by the
ICPC Foundation, and they have given permission for high school
contests to use the system if\ldots



%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{Preparation}

\section{Early Planning}

All of these should be done around 6 months before the date of the
contest itself.


\subsection*{Who is going to run the contest?}

Determining who is going to run the contest is the very first step.
Different institutions use different models.  At UVa, it is primarily
run by the students in our local ACM chapter, with assistance from a
faculty advisor.  The University of Maryland, which has run a very
popular contest every year since at least 1998, has much more of the
organization run by the department (faculty and/or staff).  Obtaining
administrative support from your department for various tasks will be
quite helpful.

For the contest itself, there are two primary roles that need to be
defined.  One is the Contest Director, who is the person coordinating
the majority of the contest.  The Head Judge (or Chief Judge) is the
individual responsible for coordinating the problem generation, and
managing the judging at the contest itself.


\subsection*{What computers will be used?}

Different contests will use different computer setups.  Part of this
step will be to decide the team size (see below).

We have used computer labs at UVa for our contests.  This allowed
students to have a full sized monitor, as well as a keyboard and a
mouse.  We used a VirtualBox environment (described later in this
document) for their environment.  The drawback to this model is that
the capacity is dependent on the number of computers and computer
labs~-- and if they are spread throughout your institution's campus,
then there is more travel time to the contest sites.  At UVa, we used
5 labs that can hold 49 people each (as per the fire marshal's limits)
-- however, one of them only has 7 usable computers due to the lab
layout.  This allowed a total of 55 teams (12 in the four larger labs,
7 in the smaller one), which was our registration cap.  Many
college-level ICPC contests use this method.

Many schools will use laptops for each team -- the University of
Maryland has used this very successfully.  The challenge to this is
where to securely store the laptops between contests.  Purchase and/or
support of the laptops is another support issue.  The laptop screens
are typically smaller than a monitor screen, which makes it more
difficult for a four person team to use it effectively.  Advantages
are that one can still load up a custom environment on the machines,
which we found very necessary (see later in this document for
details).  Furthermore, there are many more lecture rooms that can
accommodate students with laptops, as one does not require a lab with
pre-installed computers.  One can supply keyboards, monitors, and mice
along with the laptops, although this will add to both the cost and
storage issue.

One could require the students to bring their own computers.  This is
easiest to support, but it is difficult to enforce a custom
environment.  A very common aspect of the contests is to eliminate
Internet access (except to the submission server) during the contest
itself.  We do this through the setup on our VirtualBox image.  This
is more difficult when the machines are not managed by the host
institution.  We realize that one can exit a VirtualBox image on any
machine, but this has not yet been a problem.  One could distribute a
VirtualBox image, and require each participating team to have
VirtualBox installed prior to the contest.

Lastly, one can adopt a hybrid approach.  For UVa's 2018 HSPC, we have
70-80 teams that are interested, and only 55 spots in the computer
labs.  We are currently investigating using UVa supplied laptops in a
lecture hall to allow more participants to participate.  In future
years (2019 and beyond), we are hoping to obtain funding to buy a set
of laptops (along with monitors, keyboards, and mice) specifically for
this purpose.


\subsection*{Understand the financial costs}

The contest will cost some amount of money: food, prizes, t-shirts,
etc., all will have some expense.  Some of these can be lowered or
eliminated (no t-shirts, for example), or paid for by other entities
(the school or department).  A 50 team contest at UVa typically costs
around \$7,000 to run~-- the budget section is included later in this
document.

Team registrations are one way to pay for this.  However, having too
high of a registration cost will deter schools from participating.
For our contests, that would mean about \$150 per team to register.
High schools often do not have the budget to spend \$450 to send three
teams.  Thus, we sent the cost at \$40 per team, as this seemed like
an affordable expense.  The registration cost from the teams only paid
for the t-shirts.  This meant, however, that we had to raise about
\$5,000 to allow the contest to run.


\subsection*{Set reasonable expectations}

Our first contest, in 2011, had a total of three teams.  It was a huge
amount of work, as we had never done this before.  But the contest
only grew in size, and we now have to turn teams away, as we typically
reach our room capacity (ways to mitigate that are explained in this
document).  However, we all had a great time with the contest, and we
had more teams in successive years (17 in 2012, 34 in 2013, and
we hit our cap of 50 teams in 2014 and every year since).


\subsection*{Generate a list of all high schools to be invited}

As the contest becomes more well known, this becomes easier, as the
schools will find you.  However, when starting the contest from
scratch, one will need to generate a list of emails to be sent.

We defined the target area that we were expecting to attract students
-- since we are located in central Virginia, we defined the entire
state of Virginia as that target area.  For a high school running such
a contest, it may be that the high schools in the local area are the
extent of the target area.

We looked up each high school therein, and found an email address for
each school.  We attempted to get the email address for a computer
science teacher at the school -- often this was not available online,
so one could call the high school to ask who the computer science
teacher was.  If there was no obvious contact, we would ask for the
best person to send the information to.  The task of finding was split
among multiple student volunteers, as there are over 300 high schools
in Virginia.

Another option would be to leverage affordable services from
Amazon Mechanical Turk, although we did not pursue this option.

We kept this information, as we used the list in future years.
Creating an appropriate HSPC announcement mailing list for your
institution is another possibility.  Often we would receive a
response that they are forwarding it to a more appropriate person, so
we updated the list appropriately.


\subsection*{Decide if it is going to piggyback on another event}

One option is to have it be the same date as an on-campus event~-- for
many years, we did this with the Engineering Open House (a day where
accepted or interested students can take a tour of our Engineering
school and facilities).  This has the benefit of bringing in many high
school students interested in computing to the open house.  They are
typically coming from far away, and are often interested in attending
both events.  The disadvantage is that scheduling rooms is very
difficult, as all the other participants in the other event will want
the same rooms.  As our contest grew in size, and we needed more rooms
to accommodate the participants, we ran into too many scheduling
problems when it was the same date, and we have since moved it to a
different weekend.  However, this worked very well when our contest
was small.


\subsection*{Pick a date}

If the date is not decided upon by the above step, then this is far
more difficult than it sounds.  It can't be too close to the AP exams.
The date needs to avoid other contests, such as robotics tournaments
(as many students are active in both robotics and programming
contests).  It will need to avoid high school spring breaks and prom
season. In order to recruit a sufficient number of volunteers to help,
we had to avoid UVa's spring break (both he start weekend and the end
weekend as well).

Because UVa is active in the collegiate level ICPC, we would hold our
HSPC in the spring (in March or April); other schools hold theirs
throughout the year.  Some years there were few options due to the
constraints above.  After our participation rate increased, we would
email the coaches from last year a request to fill out a quick Google
Forms survey as to what weekends worked the best.  For us, most high
schools seemed to be on a somewhat similar schedule, so this greatly
aided us to find a date.


\subsection*{Reserve rooms}

This is critical, as you can't have a programming contest if you don't
have the computer labs, auditorium, etc.  Make sure that, if it is on
the date of another event, that those from the other event will not
try to take your rooms away from you. We were always sure to reserve
our rooms prior to opening up the registration, for obvious reasons.
On some years, other events would suddenly ``need'' those rooms on
that date, but as they did not reserve them ahead of time, we were
still able to use them.


\subsection*{Start generating problems}

Good quality programming contest problems take many, many, MANY
iterations to get right.  Getting the difficulty level correct is the
biggest challenge.  people generate multiple problems, and then let
the group pare down the selection from there.  See the Problem
Generation section, below.


\subsection*{Start advertising}

Email all the coaches, post on social media, and on the departmental
website.  Emailing the coaches from previous years helped as well.  We
would generate a Twitter hash tag (we would use \#uvahspc2017), and
promote it there.  Be sure to state the registration cost when
advertising.


\subsection*{Open up registration}

We discuss online registration systems elsewhere.  A custom system
works great, but can be a chore to maintain.  One can also use various
Google Forms to handle registration.  The first one would be for a
school to state how many teams.  Other forms can follow (team members,
food allergy information, etc.).  Be sure to include payment
information (amount and how to pay) along with the registration.


\section{Schedule}

It will be easiest on the participating schools if the schedule is
known during registration, as the schools will have to arrange
transportation.  Many of our schools would drive from 2 hours away
(the time taken to drive from northern Virginia to Charlottesville),
so we could not start the contest too early.

Here is a typical schedule:

\begin{itemlist}
  \item 8:30 a.m.\ --\ 9:30 a.m.: Registration (with some type of
    breakfast)
  \item 9:30 a.m.\ --\ 10:30 a.m.: Opening talk and rules
  \item 10:30 a.m.\ --\ 11:30 p.m.: Practice contest (includes time to
    travel to and from)
  \item 11:30 p.m.\ --\ 12:30 p.m.: Lunch
  \item 12:30 p.m.\ --\ 4:30 p.m.: Actual contest
  \item 4:30 p.m.\ --\ 5:00 p.m.: Close-down time (travel to the
    closing talk, etc.)
  \item 5:00 p.m.\ --\ 5:30 p.m.: Closing talk
\end{itemlist}

\noindent A number of things to keep in mind:

\begin{itemlist}
  \item We have often tweaked the schedule after registration, but we
    have never modified the starting time from what was first stated
    during registration, as that would have required a change to the
    schools' transportation plans.
  \item The contest length itself is the most important aspect, as
    that will determine the overall schedule.  We have found a four
    hour contest to be about right for high school students, but
    different contests will have different lengths.
  \item There will be time needed for the participants to move from
    one location to the other, so that should be considered when
    determining the schedule.
\end{itemlist}


%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{Problem Creation}

Problem generation has been one of our biggest challenges.  From a
collegiate perspective -- both faculty and students -- it is difficult
to understand the level of knowledge of high school students.  If the
problems are too hard, then some teams will not solve any, which can
be dispiriting.  If they are too easy, then some teams will finish
early, which is less than ideal.

\section{Background}

Include info here from Blythe's presentation about what high school
students know (based on their classes).


\section{Problem Difficulty}

Include info here from Blythe's presentation about the beginner /
experienced / advanced difficulty levels, and how to have a good
``slope'' of problems.

In 2012, there were probably too many easy problems. Consider having a
few more medium problems and a few less easy ones. Also, the
contestants found problems involving numbers much easier than anything
that involved string parsing, so consider making the easiest few
problems involve simple math operations.

In the 2011 contest, there were eight problems that spanned the easier
half of ICPC regional problems. These problems were almost universally
viewed as too difficult. The 2012 featured ten problems, containing 5
problems on par with the easiest problem at an ICPC regional, two
medium-level problems, and three hard problems. The medium problems
were still probably on the easier side by ICPC standards; the hard
problems were much more typical ICPC problems.  These problems were
much better received, although there were a few complaints about the
jump between the easy and medium problems and that there were not
enough problems that required the teams to think.

\section{Development}

Our problem development would start early~-- ideally 6 months prior to
the contest, although we did not always achieve this.  The problems
progressed through many different stages of development.  The first
step was general brainstorming; a one or two sentence description of a
potential problem, categorized by difficulty and problem type. About
four times the necessary problems should be created using this method,
so that culling can occur very easily. It is very important not to get
attached to a particular problem at this point; if the problem is
confusing or overly difficult it should not end up in the final
problem set.

From there, we selected roughly 15 problems to investigate further and
write up full problem descriptions for them. One very useful thing
that was done in the past was ensuring that for the first few
iterations, only a few people had read each problem. This ensured that
at the later stages, a fresh pair of eyes looked at the problems
without bias and inherent knowledge of the problems. At this point,
there should be a pretty clear indication of which problems are worth
pursuing.

Next was to assemble the packet of problems and proofreading the
packet.  Again, try to get a new set of eyes to look over each
problem. Try to get at least three distinct solutions to each problem;
one would be surprised how many bugs appear when different people
write solutions. Specifically, each problem should be solved at least
once in each contest language.  A few times when we did not do this,
we ran into problems: in 2012, we could that C++ handles floats
differently relative to the other languages (even though we had a
validator for that problem!), and in 2014, we found that C++ handled
longs differently relative to the other languages.  Consider having
your solution throw an Exception when illegal input is passed in
(meaning, a negative number is passed when only positive numbers are
allowed). This will help detect errors in the input generation code.

Problems should be 100\% complete more than a week before the
contest. There are far too many other things to do right before the
contest to be worrying about the specifics of the problems.


\section{Input and output considerations}
\label{sec:input-types}

Program input should be as easy to parse as possible, as this will
allow the students to focus on the problem solving, and not input
parsing.  Similarly for the output format.

Any problem will be tested against multiple test cases.  Some contest
submission systems will have all the test cases in one file, and the
program will run once, and then determine the out for all of the test
cases.  PC$^2$ traditionally uses this format.  Other submission
systems will have many different input files, one test case each, and
the program will be run multiple times~-- once for each test case.
Kattis uses this format, and PC$^2$ has started using it recently as
well.  Which system you use will determine some of the input and
output specifications.

Older ICPC problems would read in test cases until the end of input~--
however, finding the end of the input stream always took a bit longer
to code, and we have found that to be more difficult for some of the
beginner high school students.  Many recent problems will always start
with a single integer on the first line of the input file which is the
number of test cases, and then each test case will have a specific
format.  If there are multiple ``things'' that a test case has (such
as multiple nodes in a graph path problem), then having a single
integer preceeding the list of nodes will help input parsing.

Whitespace in output can be a problem.  If the output requires a list
of integers on online, space separated, then is a space at the end of
the line allowed?  Having said space is easier to implement (in the
{\tt for} loop that prints the output, just print out the value
followed by the space) rather than not allowing it (in the {\tt for}
loop that prints the output, one has to put a test to see if it is the
last value to be printed on the line).  Having very strict
requirements for the output format will disadvantage less experienced
teams, as they will not be as familiar with these details.  Submission
systems can ignore whitespace, although some of them will ignore {\em
  all} whitespace on a line, which may not be desired (as ``1 2 3''
will then be the same as ``123'').  Often the required output format
can be changed to require one value per line, which is easier to both
output and to verify.

Input that can be easily read in without dealing with whitespace makes
it much easier to parse.  Students will tyipcally use a input means
that ignores whitespace ({\tt Scanner} in Java, {\tt cin} in C++,
etc.).  An input file that is just a series of numbers will be easiest
to handle, as the whitespace between them will be ignored by these
routines.  Reading in a string that can contain whitespace will be
very difficult -- but a string that has no whitespace is also easy for
them to handle.

Problems with multiple correct answers will require a validator
program; these are described below.

We would often create an input generator that would create a large
input file.  This should test most corner cases, but feel free to add
in additional cases as well.  We would add to this certain cases
(corner cases, empty cases, etc.) to generate the full judging input.
Ensure that the judging data takes no more than 20 seconds to run on
any of the solutions, as this gives a reasonable timeout level to test
against.

Having all of the problems use the same input and output specification
(having ``Case x:" before each solution, etc.) was exceptionally
helpful. It allowed teams to figure out how to specify output in the
practice contest and then use what they learned in the actual contest.
It also allowed us to be more consistent when generating the sample
and judging output.


\section{Theming}

Starting in 2014, we started theming our problems -- we would rephrase
the ``plot'' of the problems so that they all followed a theme.  This
certainly wasn't necessary, but we felt it made the contest more
enjoyable.  The themes we have used:

\begin{itemlist}
\item 2014: Lord of the Rings
\item 2015: Avengers (the movie had recently come out)
\item 2016: Breakfast
\item 2017: Classic Nintendo Games
\item 2018: Pixar movies
\end{itemlist}

For more difficult problems, we found it was easier to generate the
problem first, and then apply a theme to it.  For the less difficult
problems, we found it easier to pick a theme (Pixar movie, breakfast
food, etc.) and then create a simple problem based on that idea.


\section{Validators}
\label{CustomValidators}

A validator is necessary when a problem has more than one correct
answer.

One example of this is a problem whose answer is a floating point
number -- rounding errors or differing precision can cause values to
vary slightly in the less significant digits.

Some contests will
require the answers be a fixed precision.  For high school contests,
we feel that this causes them to focus a lot of their time and effort
on the exact formatting of the output, rather than the problem
solving.  There are also rounding differences between the programming
languages, which will cause a language-dependent difference.  As an
aside, did you know that there are five different standards for how to
round
numbers\footurl{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_754\#Rounding_rules}?

Other examples include finding a path through a maze or other graph
(as there may be multiple paths), or finding the order to do a set of
tasks (some items can be done in either order).

If there is only one correct answer, then the correctness of the
solution can be checked via file comparison with the correct solution.
The submission systems, discussed later, have the ability to ignore
whitespace when performing said comparison.

If a problem has multiple correct answers, then a {\em validator} -- a
program that reads in the solution and returns whether it is a correct
solution or not -- will have to be written for that problem.

{\bf We do not recommend using validators!} At least not until one is
familiar with the contest submission system.  It is often the case
that a problem can be rephrased so that there is only one correct
solution.  A validator takes a fair amount of time to write and test,
especially during the busy time of contest preparation.  If the
validator does not work properly during the contest, then the contest
judges will have to manually judge each answer.

Recent contests at the collegiate ICPC level, have generally avoided
problems that require validators.  UVa's HSPC has generally avoided
them as well~-- we tried using a few in 2012, and didn't like the
experience, and have avoided it ever since.

The format for custom validators will vary based on the contest
submission system used.

The high-level overview of validators is that the program will read in
the problem input and the submission solution that was generated.
There are two methods for writing effective validators; one is having
essentially a solution embedded within the validator which calculates
the result and then compares it with the returned result.  This is
useful for floating point results, as one can compare within a certain
accuracy (say, $10^{-5}$).  The other is that the validator will have
to trace through the provided solution to see if it really does solve
the problem.  This is necessary for solutions that can have different
paths.


%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{Configuration}

\section{System Configuration}

We have tried using multiple configurations for our contests.
Initially our system support staff allowed us to customize the
environment in the labs.  As the number of teams grew, and we were no
longer able to fit in one lab, this became impractical.  Next we tried
using USB keys to boot to a customized version of Linux for a few
years, but found the USB key reliability -- as well as speed -- to be
difficult to make that work.  Furthermore, replicating the keys took a
lot of time.

As of the 2015 contest, we are now using a VirtualBox image.  The
instructions for setting up this image can now be found in
\fullref{appendix:vb-image}.  They are based on the directions that
can be found
online\footurl{http://aaronbloomfield.github.io/slp/docs/virtualbox-image-details.html}.


\section{Submission systems}

There are multiple submission systems available.  We have used PC$^2$,
as one can easily download it and install it on an institution's own
servers.  We discuss three submission systems here.

\subsubsection{PC$^2$}

PC$^2$ stands for Program Contest Control, and is a widely used
system.  It is written in Java, and is still being updated.  It can be
downloaded for free online\footurl{https://pc2.ecs.csus.edu/}.  Its
usage is described in detail in \fullref{appendix:pc2-config}.

\noindent{Pros:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item This system is free to use, and can be run on one's own servers.
\item It is widely used, and has a lot of documentation available.
\item This usually uses the input format of all test cases in one
  input file (see \ref{sec:input-types}).  If a problem is online in
  the other format (one test case per input file), it can easily be
  converted to all be in one file (just put a integer number at the
  top with the number of test cases therein).
\end{itemize}

\noindent{Cons:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item The system is often buggy, and we had the entire judging system
  be so buggy that it was unusable because of this.  Other features
  (such as problem copy) do not work, but this is not always evident
  until much later.
  \item It is not open source, which makes it very difficult to figure
    out what is going wrong, much less to fix it.
\end{itemize}

\noindent{Warnings:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item There is a separate connector program available, which allows
    for the submission (and judging) to happen through a web-based
    interface.  However, this connector has some {\bf SERIOUS} issues
    -- it forks off a thread for {\em each} connection (team, judge,
    etc.).  However, most apache2 installations have a default limit
    of 50 threads, which can easily be reached by the connector.  The
    mid-Atlantic ICPC regional contest in 2016 was a disaster because
    of this~-- with over 200 connections, nobody was able to connect
    for hours after the contest started.
\end{itemize}


\subsubsection{KATTIS}

KATTIS\footurl{https://open.kattis.com/} is an online system
originally developed by KTH Royal Institute of Technology in
Stockholm\footurl{https://www.kth.se/en}.  It is now its own entity.
It is described in detail at \ldots

\noindent{Pros:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item This is, by far, the most refined system available.  It has been
  used in multiple ICPC world finals for this reason.
\end{itemize}

\noindent{Cons:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item One cannot run this on one's own servers, which means that one
    will have to provide an open Internet connection to the kattis
    servers -- which also means that contestants can view other
    problems and solutions.
\item Because one cannot run this on one's own servers, one will
    have to get KATTIS to setup and configure the contest.  It is
    unclear if they would be willing or able to do this for high
    school contests.
  \item This usually uses the input format of one test case per input
    file file (see \ref{sec:input-types}).  If a problem is online in
    the other format (all test cases in one input file), it is more
    difficult to convert in this direction.
\end{itemize}

\noindent{Warnings:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item As mentioned above, one has to get the assistance of the KATTIS
  staff to setup and configure a contest.
  \end{itemize}


\subsubsection{DOMjudge}

DOMjudge\footurl{https://www.domjudge.org/} is a free and open source
web-based submission system.  Its usage is described in detail in
\ldots

\noindent{Pros:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item This system is free to use, and can be run on one's own servers.
\item It is open source, so modifications or bug fixes can be
  contributed by many individuals
\end{itemize}

\noindent{Cons:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item \ldots
\end{itemize}

\noindent{Warnings:}

\begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
\item \ldots
\end{itemize}




%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\chapter{Preparation Todo Lists}

\section{Previous semester}

\begin{itemlist}
\item Reserve rooms, set date, open registration
\end{itemlist}


\section{2 months out\ldots}

\begin{itemlist}
\item Get t-shirt artwork
\end{itemlist}


\section{1 month out\ldots}

\begin{itemlist}
\item Photo release form for minors\ldots
\item Close registration
\item Order UVa catering lunch
\item Order t-shirts
\item Order coach gifts (mugs)
\item Order prizes, certificate paper, name badges, holders, and
  lanyards, balloons (if needed), balloon ribbon
\item Arrange for the media to show up!  Contacts:
  \begin{itemlist}
    \item Derek Quizon (dquizon@dailyprogress.com) at the Daily
      Progress
    \item \ldots
  \end{itemlist}
\end{itemlist}


\section{Week-of checklist}

\begin{itemlist}
\item Acquire coach gifts and t-shirts
\item Communicate with admissions, if they are going to show up
\item PC$^2$ configuration; also plan for backup servers if the main
  PC$^2$ server dies.
\item Final email(s) to coaches: parking information, finalize the
  team member names (and team names!), get t-shirt sizes for
  chaperones
\item Poster (ideally in a holder) for outside the initial meeting
  building
\item Reserve balloon helium
\item Server account setup (the Linux login setup, not PC$^2$
  configuration).  Also plan for backup servers (backing up of
  accounts).
\item Contestant web site setup: this is the website that contains the
  following types of links: cheat sheets, scoreboard link, Java API,
  sample input and output, problems PDF, etc.  Ideally, this will be
  the browser's default home page.
\item Email reminder to teams that have not paid
\item Public website setup; this includes the scoreboard
\item Reserve Bodo's
\item Buy stuff from Costco: candy, bottled water, soda, coffee stuff,
  etc.
\item Coordinate volunteers, along with roles (judge, etc.) (who,
  when, how); likely at a volunteer meeting
\item Create floor plan of the competition
\end{itemlist}


\section{Day before checklist}

\begin{itemlist}
\item Name tags: print them, put them in the badge holders, attach
  lanyards
\item Pick up helium tank
\item Prepare contest presentations, for both the welcome ceremony and
  the conclusion ceremony
\item Set up print system
\item Pick up Bodo's
\item Creation of the registration packets. Put it in a nice folder,
  and include various things: schedule, information about UVa and the
  CS program, \ldots
\item Copying of problem packets
\item Prep the explanation of all the questions, including slides;
  this is in the closing ceremony.
\item Webcams if there is time: this allows the coaches to see their
  teams competing.
\item Printing of the certificates
\item {\bf SYSTEM TEST!!!!}
\item Create signs for the day of the contest (this way to the
  computer labs, that way to the auditorium, etc.)
\item Detailed script for the intro presentation and the awards
  ceremony, including who is saying what
\end{itemlist}  

\section{Day of checklist}

\begin{itemlist}
\item Printing of packets (all)
\end{itemlist}

%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\chapter{Contest Logistics}

\section{Other notes to file somewhere\ldots}

This is a section for notes that need to go somewhere, but where that
somewhere is has not yet been determined.  This section is not
expected to be in the final version of this HSPC guide.

\begin{itemize}
\item For the nametags, print out two of each nametag, and have them
  facing out in both directions.  This way, when the name tag gets
  flipped around, you can still see who that person is.
\end{itemize}

\section{Roles}

After the 2013 HSPC, when we had 39 teams, and over 150 students, we
had the realization that we would need different roles that volunteers
could fill, and a set of responsibilities for those roles.  The
responsibilities are split into two parts: preparation for the
contest, and during the contest.

Many of the tasks that are listed in these roles start with 'ensure',
as it is not necessarily the person in that role who will be doing the
task.  But it is the person in that role who will be ensuring that the
task is completed successfully.

Unless listed otherwise, most roles only require one person.

\subsection{Head Judge}

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that all the contest judges have a computer that can boot
  up Linux, and that they can connect with PC$^2$
\item Ensure that the judges are assigned to the problem(s) they will
  judge, and that they are very familiar with those problems
\item Ensure that s/he is familiar with ALL the problems
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Prior to both the practice and actual contest, ensure that the
  judges are all in the judging room and logged into PC$^2$ when the
  practice or contest is about to begin
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{Contest Judge}

\noindent There will be multiple contest judges, with each one judging
a small number of problems (1-3).

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that s/he has a working Linux system, with PC$^2$
installed and configured
\item Once the judging problem assignments are assigned, familiarize
  himself/herself with the problems
\item Ensure that they know how to use pc2judge
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Arrive at the judging room well prior to the start of the
  practice / contest
\item Judge the problems!
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{Site Director}

\noindent There is one site director for each site that the contest is
being held at.  Neighboring classrooms are considered one site, but
classrooms in different buildings are different sites.  The site
director is expected to stay on--site during the practice and contest.

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that the computer configuration is all ready to go.  The
  site director is not in charge of the configuration itself, but s/he
  will need to know how to boot up the machines, solve problems, etc.
\item Ensure that the team mappings are known (each team has a
  location in the room, a team number in PC$^2$, and a computer
  number; this needs to be able to be quickly mapped during the
  contest, and this will also be needed by the balloon manager)
\item Ensure that lines of communication with the contest director
  (and others) are known: cell numbers, etc.
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure all the machines are booted into the contest environment
  well before both the practice and contest starts.
\item Ensure that the home directories are wiped (before both the
  practice and the contest)
\item Ensure that printing works, and that the printer is all
  configured and ready to go
\item Supervise the volunteers who are acting as monitors
\item Communicate with the person managing the balloons to make sure
  that they have everything they need (management of the balloons is a
  different role; but that role and the site director will need to
  communicate)
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{Balloon Manager}

\noindent There is one balloon manager, who will supervise the balloon
distributors at the various sites.  Note that balloons are typically
not distributed during the practice contest.

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that there are enough balloons, of the appropriate
  colors, to distribute to all the teams
\item Ensure that the ribbon is ordered, and that scissors are ready
  for each site
\item Ensure that the helium tank(s) is/are ordered; one tank will be
  needed for each site; alternatively, if helium is not being used,
  then ensure that whatever balloon display method is ready to go
\item Ensure that the PC$^2$ judge logins are ready for each site, as
  the people distributing the balloons will need to be logged into
  PC$^2$ to determine which balloons to distribute
\item Ensure that each site has a Linux machine available for logging
  into pc2judge
\item Know how to configure PC$^2$ for balloon distribution (see
  section~\ref{sec:pc2judge-balloons})
\item Ensure that the balloon distributors are trained how to read
  pc2judge and distribute the balloons.  This is essential.
\item Ensure that the site mappings (done by each site director) are
  known and available during the contest
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that every site is ready to go for the balloon
  distribution for the contest
\item Ensure that the balloon pc2judge accounts are logged in at each
  site
\item Supervise the volunteers distributing the balloons
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{Food Tzar}

There are three food meals that need to be ordered for the contest:
a light breakfast, lunch, and snacks/drinks during the contest.

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that each of the three food meals have been ordered
\item Check the rules at each site as to what food is allowed at which
  site; all sites must have the same types of food available
\item Ensure that the various special food considerations (vegan,
  vegetarian, allergies, gluten-free) are handled
\item In the event that we're dealing with UVA dining, make clear to
  them that you are the person they should contact when food arrives,
  and make this clear to the other volunteers as well.
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Manage the acquisition and/or delivery of that food; in
  particular, be there to receive the catering, if that is how lunch
  is arriving
\item Ensure that clean-up is handled properly (grab volunteers that
  day for this)
\item Ensure that the various special food considerations (vegan,
  vegetarian, allergies, gluten-free) are handled
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{System Administrator}

\noindent The list below assumes that the computers in the contest are
going to be booted off of a USB key.

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that enough USB keys are available
\item Oversee the configuration of the Linux image used during the
  contest
\item Oversee the backup system of the contestant's home directories
  to the appropriate backup sever
\item And be sure to know how to restore from a backup image
\item Ensure that all the USB keys are properly duplicated
\item Ensure that the printing system is working and ready to go
\item Coordinate with the faculty advisor to ensure that the computers
  being used can be booted up on the USB keys, and that printers are
  available (one per site, with extra paper and toner cartridges)
\item Test the system prior to the contest
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Help the site directors with the booting up of the computers via
  the USB keys
\item Ensure that the printing is working
\item Be available to solve any system-related issues
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{Coach Liason}

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Obtain guest wireless access codes for the coaches (from
  \url{https://network-setup.itc.virginia.edu/}, click on ``generate
  wireless passcodes''.  In the right-hand box (labeled ``need a lot
  of passcodes''), click ``advanced guest wireless passcode
  generation'', and fill out the form.
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that a volunteer is sitting in the coach room during the
  practice and the contest; this need not be the coach liason
  himself/herself
\item Check in on the coaches from time to time during the practice
  and contest
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{Volunteer Coordinator}

Often, this role coincides with that of Contest Director.

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Maintain a list of volunteers who sign up to help for the
  contest, and keep track of their shirt sizes
\item Ensure, along with the contest coordinator, that each of the
  roles listed here are filled
\item As necessary, assign volunteers to help out with the various
  roles listed here
\item Hold the volunteer coordination meeting in the week prior to the
  contest
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Manage the volunteers during the contest, helping to assign them
  to whatever work needs being done
\end{itemlist}



\subsection{Contest Proctor}

There will be multiple contest proctors, a few for each site.

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Little needs being done prior to the contest; the site directors
  and volunteer coordinator can assign this on the contest day
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure that they are familiar with the rules of the contest
\item Make sure that nothing inappropriate happens during the contest
\end{itemlist}


\subsection{Tshirt Tzar}

\noindent The tasks listed here may be done by the contest coordinator
and the faculty advisor\ldots

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Coordinate with the artist (manage payment amount, etc.) to
  ensure that the artwork arrives at LEAST 1 month prior to the
  contest (preferably 6 weeks prior)
\item Obtian, from the Registrar (see below), the tshirt sizes need;
  make educated guesses as to the rest of the sizes needed
\item Coordinate with the faculty advisor or treasurer to ensure that
  the tshirt company is paid, and that the tshirts are printed
\item Ensure that the tshirts are picked up
\item Assist the Registrar in creating the contest packets, and the
  tshirts are a big part of these packets
\item Ensure the artist gets paid, if that was the agreement 
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Not much to do; take on another role
\end{itemlist}



\subsection{Registrar}

\noindent The tasks listed here may be done by the contest coordinator
and the faculty advisor\ldots

\noindent Before the contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Ensure the registration system is working, potentially adding
  new features (or ensuring that they are added)
\item Manage the opening, closing, etc., of registration
\item Ensure that the nametags and badges are printed
\item Create each team packet (along with the other volunteers):
  certificates, nametags, shirts, etc.
\item Provide a list of the tshirt sizes to the tshirt tzar
\item Coordinate with the volunteer coordinator to ensure that there
  are a sufficient number of people to help on the contest day with
  registration
\end{itemlist}

\noindent Contest day:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Manage the registration of the teams
\item Print out the placement certificates, after the contest itself,
  for distribution at the closing ceremony
\end{itemlist}



\section{Day of the Contest}

\subsection{Registration}

Probably need 30 minutes for registration\ldots This is a good time to
get coaches and chaperones configured for wireless access.

\subsection{Opening ceremony}

What to talk about: welcome, preparation, excitement, sponsors,
schedule, contacts, rules, \ldots

\subsection{Practice contest}

The practice contest is essential.  It is an opportunity to work out
all the kinks, understand the environment being used, and allow them
to start the actual contest on time without having to figure out
anything then (other than the contest problems).  In particular, it is
a chance for the students to:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Understand how to log in to the computer, as some may never have
used Linux.
\item Understand how to edit and compile their programs, as it may be
a different one than they are used to.
\item Introduce the students to PC$^2$ (some may never have used it
before), in particular, pc2team: how to submit problems, how to submit
clarifications, etc.  And perhaps the 'Test' button.
\item Practice printing a document.
\end{itemlist}

The practice contest should allow the coaches to work with the teams
to help them through everything; in particular, if students are not
familiar with how to compile in that environment (i.e., they are
Windows users), then the coach can help them with the editing and
compilation.

One thing to tell the teams is that nobody is going to care about the
results of the practice contest for more than 5 minutes after the
conclusion of the practice contest.  So it's a time to practice
submitting wrong answers, understanding how to use the system, etc.

There are a number of things that students should be encouraged to do
during the practice contest:

\begin{itemlist}
\item Practice submitting incorrect answers (wrong answers, run time
errors, compile errors, time limit exceeded, etc.) to see the type of
response.  Note that we have seen some contests (at the collegiate
level) where they view submitting a run time error as 'hacking' the
system.  We don't understand why, however.
\item Practice printing a document.
\item Practice submitting a clarification.
\end{itemlist}

Note that there will be a huge number of submissions during the
practice contest, more so than during any time in the actual contest,
as all the teams are going to try to submit the various wrong answers
at once.

The practice problem(s) should be very easy, so that every team can
solve it.  A typical length of the practice contest is 45 minutes; we
often only have one problem.  And balloons are typically not handed
out during the practice contest.

After the practice contest (typically at lunch), any last minute
issues can be addressed via announcements.

\subsection{Lunch}

Ensure that there are options for those with dietary restrictions. Chipotle
was the caterer we used in HSPC 2012, and the reviews were polarizing (many
students did not like the choices and complained that it was too much to digest
during the contest). A blander option may be more appealing.

\subsection{Actual contest}

\begin{itemlist}
\item Balloon delivery to the teams is a full-time job; one person
should be dedicated to this and this alone.  If it's a big contest
(more than 30-40 teams), consider putting two people on this. If more 
than one person is scheduled for balloon delivery, ensure that they 
have a very good system for determining what balloons have been delivered 
and what have not.
\end{itemlist}

\subsection{Closing Ceremony}

A sample closing ceremony.  Be sure to pick an MC 
closing ceremony: Bloomfield is MC'ing

\begin{itemlist}
\item A ``congratulations'' speech by someone important (department
chair, site director, etc.).  This to talk about:
\begin{itemlist}
\item welcome on behalf of the department
\item congratulations to everybody who participated
\item computer science is an exciting field with lots of opportunities
both in research and industry
\item acm @ uva is very active, and does X Y and Z
\item icpc @ uva is also very active, and heads to the world finals
  most years
\item thank you for participating
\end{itemlist}

\item admissions representative, if present, gives their speech
\item presentation of coach gifts (typically by the faculty member)
\item awarding of prizes
\item display of the final scoreboard
\item please fill out the surveys!
\item thank-you to the sponsors, as this would not have been possible
without them
\item closing: thank you for coming, hope you come back next year,
drive home safely
\item some teams may want to work on the problems later, so go over
them after people have the opportunity to leave
\end{itemlist}

%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{Finances}

content to come...


%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\appendix
\renewcommand\chaptername{Appendix}

%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{VirtualBox image configuration}
\label{appendix:vb-image}
\input{vb-image.tex}


%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{PC$^2$ configuration}
\label{appendix:pc2-config}
\input{pc2-config.tex}


%----------------------------------------------------------------------
\cleardoublepage
\chapter{Sample Emails}

The e-mails in this section were the ones that were sent out for the
2012 UVa HSPC contest.

\section{Open Registration}

\noindent Dear John Doe,

\noindent I have opened registration to the High School Programming
Competition at UVa. The competition will be held on Saturday,
March 17th in Charlottesville, VA. You can register up to three,
four person, teams per school for the competition here, and find
out more information about the competition here. If you have
additional questions, either reply to this message or email me
at pmc8p@virginia.edu. Registration is \$40 per team and will
occur on a first-come, first-serve basis with an upper limit of
30 teams. Registration will close on March 1st, but I'd
appreciate it if you registered earlier.

\noindent Regards,

\noindent Jane Doe

\noindent HSPC Chair




\section{Notification two weeks prior to the contest}

Email subject: ``UVa HSPC: Important Information''; no attachments.

\noindent Hello Teams,

\noindent With just under two weeks to go, the contest is right around
the corner and we have some important information for you. Next {\bf
Monday (3.12.12)} will be the last day to update us on: the {\bf name
of contestants~/ coach} (we would like {\bf first and last} names),
the {\bf team name}, and any {\bf dietary restrictions} or
preferences. Just reply to this email with any updates you may have.

\noindent We are also happy to announce that the School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences, here at UVa, will be holding their annual open
house on the same day as our contest. You can read more information
about the open
house \href{http://www.seas.virginia.edu/events/openhouse.php}{here}. We
want you to have time explore the open house, so we've revised the
contest schedule as follows:


\noindent {\bf Teams must register by 9am in Rice 130.}

\begin{itemlist}
\item 8:00 - 9:00a:	Registration in Rice 130
\item 9:00 - 9:50a:	Teams Explore SEAS Open House
\item 10:00 - 11:00a:	Introduction, Rules, and Questions in Rice 130
\item 11:00 - 11:45a:	Practice Contest in Mechanical Engineering
Computer Labs (with coaches)
\item 12:00 - 12:45p:	Lunch in Thornton E303
\item 1:00 - 4:00p:	Contest in Mechanical Engineering Computing
Labs, coaches stay in Thornton E303
\item 4:00 - 5:00p:	Awards Ceremony, Wrap-up in Rice 130
\end{itemlist}

\noindent For your convenience, I've embedded the site map and
directions also available on our
\href{http://acm.cs.virginia.edu/?page_id=148}{website}. An
interactive site map and directions are also available
\href{http://www.bing.com/maps/?v=2&cp=qb4v7w8fqq8y&lvl=18.61&dir=357.51&sty=u&cid=45063A907E1C57C2!389&form=LMLTCC}{here}.

\begin{figure}[H]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=5in]{images/HSPC-2012-Site-Map.png}
\end{center}
\end{figure}

\noindent We have all been working hard to get ready, and are really
excited; hopefully you're looking forward to the contest as much as we
are.

\noindent Regards,\newline\noindent  Jane Doe \newline\noindent
HSPC Chair


\section{Media release email request}

Email subject: ``UVa HSPC: Media Release Form''; attachment was the
Photo-Permission-Form.pdf.

\noindent Hello again teams,

\noindent We have a last minute request for you; we are trying to get
the local media to cover this weekend's event. In order for them to
include a photo and for us to publish a gallery of the event online we
need a release from everyone pictured. This is completely {\bf
optional} and will have no effect on the team on the day of the
contest, but we would appreciate it if you can get the signatures. For
contestants under the age of 18, we need a parent or legal guardian's
signature. If you are able to get the forms signed, you may turn them
in to us at registration.

\noindent Thanks,\newline\noindent  Jane Doe \newline\noindent
HSPC Chair


\end{document}
